21 January 2024: Today I notice the first snowdrops rising from leaf litter in the woods where I live a few miles from Stratton Strawless.

Spring came late to much of the northern hemisphere in 1784. One reason we know this is because of records made by Robert Marsham of Stratton Strawless in Norfolk, England, in which he noted that his hawthorns began to leaf on April 22, fully two months later than in recent previous seasons, and the latest by far in all the forty-eight years he had been keeping records. The anomaly was due to an eruption of the Lakagígar volcanic fissure in Iceland that past June, which had led to a hot, cloudy summer followed by an extremely hard winter in much of Europe.

In 1736, while still in his twenties, Marsham embarked on his lifetime project of recording what he was to call his “Indications of Spring”. He noted down the dates of biological events related to the indigenous flora and fauna, and made more general observations too. During the exceptionally cold winter of 1739–40, for example, he wrote that many of his trees split apart and the urine froze in his chamber pot. In Norwich and surrounding areas, there were food riots “for which some were hang’d at ye next Assizes”.1 As a prominent landowner, Marsham served for much of his long life on local assizes juries, and, fearful of revolutions like those in America and France, played his part in handing down these harsh sentences.

Although most of his journals and letters have been lost over time, “Indications of Spring” has survived because, after a half-century of assiduous data entry, he presented his accumulated findings to the Royal Society. To Joseph Banks, the society’s president, Marsham wrote: “As I know of your boundless curiosity, I think it possible that an imperfect Calendar of some few articles of Spring, many years past, may afford you some amusement.”2 The calendar was published in the society’s journal, Philosophical Transactions, the following year as a tabulation on three foldout pages.

The table shows how the project developed in Marsham’s mind. In the left-hand column, he dates all his observations by year, from 1736 to 1788. He begins tentatively with only a few obvious items, such as when he first hears the song thrush and the arrival of the first swallow, entering the date in the appropriate box in the table. Sometimes, he notes when an observation was made in another county, presumably while he was travelling. It is a few years before he settles into his methodology, developing a full list of twenty-seven items of flora and fauna recorded at home entirely on his own estate, selected so as to cover the whole spring season from winter to early summer. They include the leafing and flowering of hawthorn and the leafing dates of ash, oak, elm, beech, birch, hornbeam, and chestnut trees, as well as the dates on which birds such as the cuckoo and nightingale began to sing. The snowdrop flower is among the earliest things he expects to see. The last anticipated observation of the season is the distinctive calling of the nightjar, which he terms the “Churn Owl”, and which is still easily heard on warm evenings in the area today. Marsham continued to record this information until his death at the age of eighty-nine.

23 January 2024: I hear (but in the ivy cannot see) rival song thrushes trying out a few riffs for the mating season.

Born in 1708, Marsham inherited his father’s heathland estate north of Norwich in 1751. The sandy soil was too poor for growing crops or even grass for grazing — hence the local name Strawless. Instead, Marsham planted trees — tens of thousands, maybe even millions, of mainly deciduous species, chosen for their longevity over fast-growing pines — and in doing so transformed the landscape.

Marsham’s way with trees influenced the famous landscape gardener Humphry Repton, and they became friends in their old age. After Marsham’s death in 1797, Repton hoped to publish his notes on tree planting as a book, but the idea never came to fruition. Repton wrote that Marsham had achieved a “far better method of planting waste land, where enclosures are not permitted”.3 He was referring to Marsham’s choice of predominantly deciduous planting as well as his method of grouping and rooting the saplings. Repton followed this example in his artfully designed landscapes for many grand English country houses.

“I plant whenever I have leisure”, Marsham wrote. Only a few of his trees may still be discovered today. A giant twisted sycamore, which stands across the road from Stratton Strawless Hall, bears a sign attesting to its protected status as of 1995, but it is guarded by its own rotting fallen boughs and surely hasn’t long to live. A cedar planted in 1747 has grown to more than thirty metres. You can’t get close enough to hug its eight-metre girth as it lies within the bounds of a farm heavily armoured with hostile signage. It can best be seen from afar in any case, standing protectively head and shoulders above the surrounding mature woodland.

Marsham also corresponded with Gilbert White, the most noted British naturalist in this period, who recorded the arrival dates of migratory birds to his Hampshire estate at Selborne. White praised Marsham as “a painful [i.e.
