This PEP provides the motivation and rationale for PEP 634 ("Structural Pattern Matching: Specification"). First-time readers are encouraged to start with PEP 636, which provides a gentler introduction to the concepts, syntax and semantics of patterns.

Python already supports a limited form of this through sequence unpacking assignments, which the new proposal leverages.

Several other common Python idioms are also relevant:

We believe that adding pattern matching to Python will enable Python users to write cleaner, more readable code for examples like those above, and many others.

For a more academic discussion to this proposal, see.

Pattern matching is complimentary to the object-oriented paradigm. Using OO and inheritance we can easily define a method on a base class that defines default behavior for a specific operation on that class, and we can override this default behavior in subclasses. We can also use the Visitor pattern to separate actions from data.

But this is not sufficient for all situations. For example, a code generator may consume an AST, and have many operations where the generated code needs to vary based not just on the class of a node, but also on the value of some class attributes, like the BinOp example above. The Visitor pattern is insufficiently flexible for this: it can only select based on the class.

See a complete example.

Like the Visitor pattern, pattern matching allows for a strict separation of concerns: specific actions or data processing is independent of the class hierarchy or manipulated objects. When dealing with predefined or even built-in classes, in particular, it is often impossible to add further methods to the individual classes. Pattern matching not only relieves the programmer or class designer from the burden of the boilerplate code needed for the Visitor pattern, but is also flexible enough to directly work with built-in types. It naturally distinguishes between sequences of different lengths, which might all share the same class despite obviously differing structures. Moreover, pattern matching automatically takes inheritance into account: a class D inheriting from C will be handled by a pattern that targets C by default.

Object oriented programming is geared towards single-dispatch: it is a single instance (or the type thereof) that determines which method is to be called. This leads to a somewhat artificial situation in case of binary operators where both objects might play an equal role in deciding which implementation to use (Python addresses this through the use of reversed binary methods). Pattern matching is structurally better suited to handle such situations of multi-dispatch, where the action to be taken depends on the types of several objects to equal parts.

Many Python applications and libraries are not written in a consistent OO style -- unlike Java, Python encourages defining functions at the top-level of a module, and for simple data structures, tuples (or named tuples or lists) and dictionaries are often used exclusively or mixed with classes or data classes.

Pattern matching is particularly suitable for picking apart such data structures. As an extreme example, it's easy to write code that picks a JSON data structure using match:

Functional programming generally prefers a declarative style with a focus on relationships in data. Side effects are avoided whenever possible. Pattern matching thus naturally fits and highly supports functional programming style.

This section provides the rationale for individual design decisions. It takes the place of "Rejected ideas" in the standard PEP format. It is organized in sections corresponding to the specification (PEP 634).

Much of the power of pattern matching comes from the nesting of subpatterns. That the success of a pattern match depends directly on the success of subpattern is thus a cornerstone of the design. However, although a pattern like P(Q(), R()) succeeds only if both subpatterns Q() and R() succeed (i.e. the success of pattern P depends on Q and R), the pattern P is checked first. If P fails, neither Q() nor R() will be tried (this is a direct consequence of the fact that if P fails, there are no subjects to match against Q() and R() in the first place).

Also note that patterns bind names to values rather than performing an assignment. This reflects the fact that patterns aim to not have side effects, which also means that Capture or AS patterns cannot assign a value to an attribute or subscript. We thus consistently use the term 'bind' instead of 'assign' to emphasise this subtle difference between traditional assignments and name binding in patterns.

The match statement evaluates an expression to produce a subject, finds the first pattern that matches the subject, and executes the associated block of code. Syntactically, the match statement thus takes an expression and a sequence of case clauses, where each case clause comprises a pattern and a block of code.

Since case clauses comprise a block of code, they adhere to the existing indentation scheme with the syntactic structure of <keyword> ...: <(indented) block>, which resembles a compound statement. The keyword case reflects its widespread use in pattern matching languages, ignoring those languages that use other syntactic means such as a symbol like |, because it would not fit established Python structures. The syntax of patterns following the keyword is discussed below.

Given that the case clauses follow the structure of a compound statement, the match statement itself naturally becomes a compound statement itself as well, following the same syntactic structure. This naturally leads to match <expr>: <case_clause>+. Note that the match statement determines a quasi-scope in which the evaluated subject is kept alive (although not in a local variable), similar to how a with statement might keep a resource alive during execution of its block. Furthermore, control flows from the match statement to a case clause and then leaves the block of the match statement. The block of the match statement thus has both syntactic and semantic meaning.
